# Representing Cultural Object Metadata using modern OpenGL

## A project to parse and visualize artworks in the Web Gallery of Art database

**Abstract**---This project provides a tool to represent art object distribution over time and locale. It employs a public domain art object database as a basis, and uses the metadata contained therein to allow user filtering of the visualization, in order to refine and customize the represented data set. The user may thus enjoy an immediate, intuitive sense of how the art objects have appeared, based on filter selections.

### Overview

It is not uncommon to find the tools of data visualization applied to data in many domains, including many that have enjoyed scant quantitative treatment. This depends, of course, on the availabilty of data sets in some usable computational form, or at least on the ready conversion of the phemonena of a domain into interesting collections of data. The field of Art History has so far playing a minor role in what is commonly called the ‘Digital Humanities’, with the exception of disparate efforts to convert image libraries into digital form. This is slowly beginning to change, as art object metadata is placed online through a number of recent initiatives. It is unfortunate that most of the work that has been done has been held in closed, propietary tools, such as Artstor and the many museum websites and libraries.

The oldest and most comprehensive collection that is also freely accessible is the *Web Gallery of Art*. Under development for nearly twenty years, this online image database offers a collection of about 37,000 objects, along with a consistent scheme of metadata for each (e.g. year, location, artist). Since there is currently no analytical tool for this information, we have undertaken to develop one, in order to represent aggregate patterns and phenomena found in the metadata

The tool is organized around location and time of creation, since these are the two primary analytical axes of art historical commentary: ‘where’ and ‘when’ are attributes that even objects of unknown or collective authorship must possess. The tool encourages a more finely-grained analysis that could supplement natural lines of inquiry, e.g. how the pattern of objects creation changes when we only consider the medium of stained glass, or look exclusivley at mythological subjects. These are the sort of questions that ordinarily were the domain of scholars possessing uncommon breadth and experience, those who had laboriously assembled a mental impression of art patterns – the sort of specialist who might for example note that Annunciation scenes nearly always have Gabriel entering from the left until the late Renaissance. It would not be feasible to simply replace this ‘learned intuition’ with a database and visualization tool, but it is possible at least to develop a supplement to that precious resource: scholarly expertise. Indeed, were such a tool available, it would have the advantage of scaling much more easily that the experience of individual scholars. Moreover, such tools will certainly be needed after the digitization of art scholarship grows out from its’ current nascent stage.

### To-do 
* The ability to render the representative colors on the Earth ‘surface’ using colored country-shaped polygons is nearly within reach, with most of the necessary classes already developed.
* While many attempts have been made to generalize the tool to changes in metadata (such as new categories of art object, etc) many of these aspects have ultimately been hard-coded into the tool. It would be helpful to raise the level of abstraction a bit higher, and populate the filter categories at run-time based on the initial parsing of the database.
* As part of such an effort, the dependency on the obscure, obsolete AntTweakBar GUI library should be removed. The filter controls should instead be drawn in OpenGL by extending the current Timeline class.
* The project might be ported to WebGL and JavaScript and published as a web application, which would remove the current requirement of compiling under an Xcode environment (no doubt at the cost of some speed). 

